doc/en/user/source/extensions/inspire/using.rst, before:

.. _inspire_using:

Using the INSPIRE extension
===========================

When the INSPIRE extension has been properly installed, the :ref:`services_webadmin_wms`, :ref:`services_webadmin_wfs` and :ref:`services_webadmin_wcs` sections of the :ref:`web_admin` will show an extra INSPIRE configuration section. If the data directory has not been configured with INSPIRE parameters before, this section will just contain a check box to enable the creation of an INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element.

.. figure:: images/noinspire.png
      :align: center

.. note:: If you do not see this content in the service configuration pages, the INSPIRE extension may not be installed properly.  Reread the section on :ref:`inspire_installing` and verify that the correct file was saved to the correct directory.

Extended WMS configuration
--------------------------

INSPIRE-specific configuration is accessed on the main :ref:`services_webadmin_wms` page in the :ref:`web_admin`. This is accessed by clicking on the :guilabel:`WMS` link on the sidebar.

.. note:: You must be logged in as an administrator to edit WMS configuration.

Once on the WMS configuration page, there will be a block titled :guilabel:`INSPIRE`. If you enable the checkbox shown above this section will have three additional settings:

* :guilabel:`Language` combo box, for setting the Supported, Default, and Response languages
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field, a URL containing the location of the metadata associated with the WMS
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box, for detailing whether the metadata came from a CSW (Catalog Service) or a standalone metadata file

.. figure:: images/inspire.png
   :align: center

   *INSPIRE-related options*

After clicking :guilabel:`Submit` on this page, any changes will be immediately reflected in the WMS 1.3.0 capabilities document.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field is mandatory so you will not be allowed to submit a blank value.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box only allows to select the appropriate MIME type for a CSW response or standalone metadata file or to omit a value altogether. If you think other values would be useful you could raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`. In the meantime it is possible to manually edit the created configuration files as a workaround.

.. note:: Currently GeoServer does not offer the ability to configure alternate languages, as there is no way for an administrator to configure multiple responses.  There is an :geos:`open issue <4502>` on the GeoServer issue tracker that we are hoping to secure funding for.  If you are interested in implementing or funding this improvement, please raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`.

Extended WMS Capabilities
-------------------------

.. note:: The INSPIRE extension only modifies the WMS 1.3.0 response, so please make sure that you are viewing the correct capabilities document.

The WMS 1.3.0 capabilities document will contain two additional entries in the ``xsi:schemaLocation`` of the root ``<WMS_Capabilities>`` tag once the INSPIRE extension is installed:

* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_vs/1.0``
* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_vs/1.0/inspire_vs.xsd``

If you have enabled the check box to create the INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element and entered the values described in the previous section then there will also be an additional ExtendedCapabilities block. This tag block shows up in between the tags for ``<Exception>`` and ``<Layer>``.  It contains the following information:

* Metadata URL and MIME type
* Supported Language(s)
* Response Language

With the example values shown in the above configuration panel, this block would contain the following content::

  <inspire_vs:ExtendedCapabilities>
   <inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
    <inspire_common:URL>http://mysite.org/metadata.xml</inspire_common:URL>
    <inspire_common:MediaType>
     application/vnd.iso.19139+xml
    </inspire_common:MediaType>
   </inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
   <inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
    <inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
     <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
    </inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
   </inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
   <inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
    <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
   </inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
  </inspire_vs:ExtendedCapabilities>

Extended WFS and WCS configuration
----------------------------------

INSPIRE-specific configuration is accessed on the main :ref:`services_webadmin_wfs` and :ref:`services_webadmin_wcs` pages in the :ref:`web_admin`.  These are accessed by clicking on the :guilabel:`WFS` and :guilabel:`WCS` links on the sidebar respectively.

.. note:: You must be logged in as an administrator to edit WFS configuration.

Once on the WFS or WCS configuration page, there will be a block titled :guilabel:`INSPIRE`. If you enable the checkbox shown above this section will have the following additional settings:

* :guilabel:`Language` combo box, for setting the Supported, Default, and Response languages
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field, a URL containing the location of the metadata associated with the WFS or WCS
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box, for detailing whether the metadata came from a CSW (Catalog Service) or a standalone metadata file
* :guilabel:`Spatial dataset identifers` table, where you can specify a code (mandatory), a namespace (optional) and a metadata URL (optional) for each spatial data set the WFS or WCS is offering

.. figure:: images/inspire_wfs.png
   :align: center

   *INSPIRE-related options*

After clicking :guilabel:`Submit` on this page, any changes will be immediately reflected in the WFS 1.1 and WFS 2.0 or WCS 2.0 capabilities documents as appropriate.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field and at least one :guilabel:`Spatial dataset identifers` entry are mandatory so you will not be allowed to submit the page without these.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box only allows to select the appropriate MIME type for a CSW response or standalone metadata file or to omit a value altogether. If you think other values would be useful you could raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`. In the meantime it is possible to manually edit the created configuration files as a workaround.

.. note:: Currently GeoServer does not offer the ability to configure alternate languages, as there is no way for an administrator to configure multiple responses.  There is an :geos:`open issue <4502>` on the GeoServer issue tracker that we are hoping to secure funding for.  If you are interested in implementing or funding this improvement, please raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`.

Extended WFS and WCS Capabilities
---------------------------------

.. note:: The INSPIRE directive is relevant to WFS 1.1 and 2.0 and WCS 2.0 only, so please make sure that you are viewing the correct capabilities document.

The WFS and WCS capabilities documents will contain two additional entries in the ``xsi:schemaLocation`` of the root element tag once the INSPIRE extension is installed:

* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/common/1.0/common.xsd``
* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_dls/1.0/inspire_dls.xsd``

If you have enabled the check box to create the INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element and entered the values described in the previous section then there will also be an additional ExtendedCapabilities block with the following information:

* Metadata URL and MIME type
* Supported Language(s)
* Response Language
* Spatial data identifier(s)

With the example values shown in the above configuration panel, this block would contain the following content::

  <inspire_dls:ExtendedCapabilities>
   <inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
    <inspire_common:URL>
     http://mysite.org/csw?SERVICE=CSW&REQUEST=GetRecordById&ID=wfs2&
    </inspire_common:URL>
    <inspire_common:MediaType>
     application/vnd.ogc.csw.GetRecordByIdResponse_xml
    </inspire_common:MediaType>
   </inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
   <inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
    <inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
     <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
    </inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
   </inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
   <inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
    <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
   </inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
   <inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier
    metadataURL="http://mysite.org/ds/md/ds1.xml">
    <inspire_common:Code>ds1</inspire_common:Code>
    <inspire_common:Namespace>
     http://metadata.mysite.org/ds
    </inspire_common:Namespace>
   </inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
   <inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
    <inspire_common:Code>
     fc929094-8a30-2617-e044-002128a47908
    </inspire_common:Code>
   </inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
  </inspire_dls:ExtendedCapabilities>

The spatial data identifiers section is mandatory, but cannot be filled by default, it is your duty to provide at least one spatial dataset identifier (see the INSPIRE download service technical guidelines for more information).

Commit message:

Add note on languages included in dropdown list

doc/en/user/source/extensions/inspire/using.rst, after:

.. _inspire_using:

Using the INSPIRE extension
===========================

When the INSPIRE extension has been properly installed, the :ref:`services_webadmin_wms`, :ref:`services_webadmin_wfs` and :ref:`services_webadmin_wcs` sections of the :ref:`web_admin` will show an extra INSPIRE configuration section. If the data directory has not been configured with INSPIRE parameters before, this section will just contain a check box to enable the creation of an INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element.

.. figure:: images/noinspire.png
      :align: center

.. note:: If you do not see this content in the service configuration pages, the INSPIRE extension may not be installed properly.  Reread the section on :ref:`inspire_installing` and verify that the correct file was saved to the correct directory.

Extended WMS configuration
--------------------------

INSPIRE-specific configuration is accessed on the main :ref:`services_webadmin_wms` page in the :ref:`web_admin`. This is accessed by clicking on the :guilabel:`WMS` link on the sidebar.

.. note:: You must be logged in as an administrator to edit WMS configuration.

Once on the WMS configuration page, there will be a block titled :guilabel:`INSPIRE`. If you enable the checkbox shown above this section will have three additional settings:

* :guilabel:`Language` combo box, for setting the Supported, Default, and Response languages
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field, a URL containing the location of the metadata associated with the WMS
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box, for detailing whether the metadata came from a CSW (Catalog Service) or a standalone metadata file

.. figure:: images/inspire.png
   :align: center

   *INSPIRE-related options*

After clicking :guilabel:`Submit` on this page, any changes will be immediately reflected in the WMS 1.3.0 capabilities document.

.. note:: At the time of writing the `INSPIRE Schemas <http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/common/1.0/common.xsd>`_ only allow 23 choices for :guilabel:`Language`. The GeoServer INSPIRE extension allows some other languages to be chosen. If you choose one of these your capabilities document won't be Schema valid but, as discussed in :geos:`issue 7388 <7388>`, the INSPIRE Schemas seem to be at fault. If you have some other language you want adding to the list then please :ref:`raise the issue <getting_involved>`.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field is mandatory so you will not be allowed to submit a blank value.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box only allows to select the appropriate MIME type for a CSW response or standalone metadata file or to omit a value altogether. If you think other values would be useful you could raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`. In the meantime it is possible to manually edit the created configuration files as a workaround.

.. note:: Currently GeoServer does not offer the ability to configure alternate languages, as there is no way for an administrator to configure multiple responses.  There is an :geos:`open issue <4502>` on the GeoServer issue tracker that we are hoping to secure funding for.  If you are interested in implementing or funding this improvement, please raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`.

Extended WMS Capabilities
-------------------------

.. note:: The INSPIRE extension only modifies the WMS 1.3.0 response, so please make sure that you are viewing the correct capabilities document.

The WMS 1.3.0 capabilities document will contain two additional entries in the ``xsi:schemaLocation`` of the root ``<WMS_Capabilities>`` tag once the INSPIRE extension is installed:

* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_vs/1.0``
* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_vs/1.0/inspire_vs.xsd``

If you have enabled the check box to create the INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element and entered the values described in the previous section then there will also be an additional ExtendedCapabilities block. This tag block shows up in between the tags for ``<Exception>`` and ``<Layer>``.  It contains the following information:

* Metadata URL and MIME type
* Supported Language(s)
* Response Language

With the example values shown in the above configuration panel, this block would contain the following content::

  <inspire_vs:ExtendedCapabilities>
   <inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
    <inspire_common:URL>http://mysite.org/metadata.xml</inspire_common:URL>
    <inspire_common:MediaType>
     application/vnd.iso.19139+xml
    </inspire_common:MediaType>
   </inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
   <inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
    <inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
     <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
    </inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
   </inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
   <inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
    <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
   </inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
  </inspire_vs:ExtendedCapabilities>

Extended WFS and WCS configuration
----------------------------------

INSPIRE-specific configuration is accessed on the main :ref:`services_webadmin_wfs` and :ref:`services_webadmin_wcs` pages in the :ref:`web_admin`.  These are accessed by clicking on the :guilabel:`WFS` and :guilabel:`WCS` links on the sidebar respectively.

.. note:: You must be logged in as an administrator to edit WFS configuration.

Once on the WFS or WCS configuration page, there will be a block titled :guilabel:`INSPIRE`. If you enable the checkbox shown above this section will have the following additional settings:

* :guilabel:`Language` combo box, for setting the Supported, Default, and Response languages
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field, a URL containing the location of the metadata associated with the WFS or WCS
* :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box, for detailing whether the metadata came from a CSW (Catalog Service) or a standalone metadata file
* :guilabel:`Spatial dataset identifers` table, where you can specify a code (mandatory), a namespace (optional) and a metadata URL (optional) for each spatial data set the WFS or WCS is offering

.. figure:: images/inspire_wfs.png
   :align: center

   *INSPIRE-related options*

After clicking :guilabel:`Submit` on this page, any changes will be immediately reflected in the WFS 1.1 and WFS 2.0 or WCS 2.0 capabilities documents as appropriate.

.. note:: At the time of writing the `INSPIRE Schemas <http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/common/1.0/common.xsd>`_ only allow 23 choices for :guilabel:`Language`. The GeoServer INSPIRE extension allows some other languages to be chosen. If you choose one of these your capabilities document won't be Schema valid but, as discussed in :geos:`issue 7388 <7388>`, the INSPIRE Schemas seem to be at fault. If you have some other language you want adding to the list then please :ref:`raise the issue <getting_involved>`.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata URL` field and at least one :guilabel:`Spatial dataset identifers` entry are mandatory so you will not be allowed to submit the page without these.

.. note:: The :guilabel:`Service Metadata Type` combo box only allows to select the appropriate MIME type for a CSW response or standalone metadata file or to omit a value altogether. If you think other values would be useful you could raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`. In the meantime it is possible to manually edit the created configuration files as a workaround.

.. note:: Currently GeoServer does not offer the ability to configure alternate languages, as there is no way for an administrator to configure multiple responses.  There is an :geos:`open issue <4502>` on the GeoServer issue tracker that we are hoping to secure funding for.  If you are interested in implementing or funding this improvement, please raise the issue on the :ref:`GeoServer mailing list <getting_involved>`.

Extended WFS and WCS Capabilities
---------------------------------

.. note:: The INSPIRE directive is relevant to WFS 1.1 and 2.0 and WCS 2.0 only, so please make sure that you are viewing the correct capabilities document.

The WFS and WCS capabilities documents will contain two additional entries in the ``xsi:schemaLocation`` of the root element tag once the INSPIRE extension is installed:

* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/common/1.0/common.xsd``
* ``http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/schemas/inspire_dls/1.0/inspire_dls.xsd``

If you have enabled the check box to create the INSPIRE ExtendedCapabilities element and entered the values described in the previous section then there will also be an additional ExtendedCapabilities block with the following information:

* Metadata URL and MIME type
* Supported Language(s)
* Response Language
* Spatial data identifier(s)

With the example values shown in the above configuration panel, this block would contain the following content::

  <inspire_dls:ExtendedCapabilities>
   <inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
    <inspire_common:URL>
     http://mysite.org/csw?SERVICE=CSW&REQUEST=GetRecordById&ID=wfs2&
    </inspire_common:URL>
    <inspire_common:MediaType>
     application/vnd.ogc.csw.GetRecordByIdResponse_xml
    </inspire_common:MediaType>
   </inspire_common:MetadataUrl>
   <inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
    <inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
     <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
    </inspire_common:DefaultLanguage>
   </inspire_common:SupportedLanguages>
   <inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
    <inspire_common:Language>eng</inspire_common:Language>
   </inspire_common:ResponseLanguage>
   <inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier
    metadataURL="http://mysite.org/ds/md/ds1.xml">
    <inspire_common:Code>ds1</inspire_common:Code>
    <inspire_common:Namespace>
     http://metadata.mysite.org/ds
    </inspire_common:Namespace>
   </inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
   <inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
    <inspire_common:Code>
     fc929094-8a30-2617-e044-002128a47908
    </inspire_common:Code>
   </inspire_dls:SpatialDataSetIdentifier>
  </inspire_dls:ExtendedCapabilities>

The spatial data identifiers section is mandatory, but cannot be filled by default, it is your duty to provide at least one spatial dataset identifier (see the INSPIRE download service technical guidelines for more information).
