doc/en/user/source/community/solr/index.rst, before:

.. _community_solr:

SOLR data store
===============

`SORL <http://lucene.apache.org/solr/>`_ is a popular search platform based on Apache Lucene project. 
Its major features include powerful full-text search, hit highlighting, faceted search, near real-time indexing, 
dynamic clustering, database integration, rich document (e.g., Word, PDF) handling, and most
importantly for the GeoServer integration, geospatial search.

The latest versions of SOLR can host most basic types of geometries (points, lines and polygons)
as WKT and index them with a spatial index.

.. note:: GeoServer does not come built-in with support for SOLR; it must be installed through this community module. 

SOLR version
------------

The GeoServer SORL extension has been tested with SORL version 4.8 and 4.9.

 .. _solr_install:
 
Matching documents with layers and feature types
------------------------------------------------

SOLR indexes almost free form documents, the SOLR instance has a collection of fields, and 
each document can contain any field, in any combination.
On the other side, GeoServer organizes data in fixed structure feature types, and exposes 
data in separate layers.

In order to identify the layers, GeoServer demands that the documents contain a special property,
identified by the administrator, that will contain the name of the layer/feature type to which
the document is associated: this helps GeoServer identify the documents associated to each layer.

Then, when configuring a new layer, GeoServer will ask the administrator to pick the fields
that will make up the new feature type, effectively casting the variable structure in the document
to a fixed one that GeoServer can manage: in case the document contained in the feature type miss
some of the fields, a null value will be associated to them.


Installing the SOLR extension
-----------------------------------


#. Download the SOLR extension from the `nightly GeoServer community module builds <http://ares.boundlessgeo.com/geoserver/master/community-latest/>`_.

   .. warning:: Make sure to match the version of the extension to the version of the GeoServer instance.

#. If GeoServer is running, stop it.

#. Extract the contents of the archive into the ``WEB-INF/lib`` directory of the GeoServer installation.

#. Restart GeoServer, the SORL data store should show up as an option when going through the new store
   creation workflow.

Connecting to a SOLR server
----------------------------

Once the extension is properly installed ``SOLR`` will show up as an option when creating a new data store.

.. figure:: images/solr_store.png
   :align: center

   *SOLR in the list of vector data sources*

Configuring a SOLR data store
-----------------------------

.. figure:: images/solr_configuration.png
   :align: center

   *Configuring a SOLR data store*

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80

   * - ``solr_url``
     - Provide a link to the SORL server that provides the documents
   * - ``layer_name_field``
     - Name of the field that associated the documents to their layer name.  
     
Once the parameters are entered and confirmed, GeoServer will contact the SORL server and 
fetch a list of layer names and fill the layer chooser page accordingly:

.. figure:: images/solr_layerlist.png
   :align: center
   
   *List of layers available in the SOLR server*

Configuring a new SOLR base layer
---------------------------------

Once the layer name is chosen, the usual layer configuration panel will appear, with a pop-up showing
in a table the fields available:

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist.png
   :align: center
   
   *The layer field list configuration*
   
.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80

   * - ``Is empty``
     - Read only fields, checked if the field has no values in the documents associated to this layer
   * - ``Use``
     - Used to select the fields that will make up this layer features
   * - ``Name``
     - Name of the field
   * - ``Type``
     - Type of the field, as derived from the SORL schema. For geometry types, you have the option to provide a more specific data type
   * - ``SRID``
     - Native spatial reference ID of the geometries
   * - ``Default geometry``
     - Indicates if the geometry field is the default one. Useful if the documents contain more than one geometry field, 
       as SLDs and spatial filters will hit the default geometry field unless otherwise specified
   * - ``Identifier``
     - Check if the field can be used as the feature identifier 


By default the list will contain only the fields that have at least one non null value in the documents
associated to the layer, but it is possible to get the full list by un-checking the "Hide field if empty"
check-box:

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist_all.png
   :align: center
   
   *Showing all fields available in SOLR*

Once the table is filled with the all the required parameters, press the "Apply" button to confirm
and go back to the main layer configuration panel.
Should the choice of fields be modified, you can click the "Configure SOLR fields" just below the "Feature Type Details" panel.

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist_edit.png
   :align: center
   
   *Going back to the field list editor*
   
The rest of the layer configuration works as normal, once all the fields are provided you'll be able to
save and use the layer in WMS and WFS.

.. warning:: In order to compute the bounding box GeoServer will have to fetch all the geometries making up the layer out of SOLR, 
          this operation might take some time, you're advised to manually entered the native bounding box when configuring a 
          layer out of a large document set
          
Custom ``q`` and ``fq`` parameters
----------------------------------

The SORL store will translate most OGC filters, as specified in SLD, CQL Filter or OGC filter,
down into the SOLR engine for native filtering, using the ``fq`` parameter.
However, in some occasions you might need to specify manually either ``q`` or ``fq``, to leverage
some native SORL filtering ability that cannot be expressed via OGC filters.

This can be done by specifying those as ``viewparams``, pretty much like in parametric sql views
atop relational databases.

For example, the following URL::

    http://localhost:8080/geoserver/nurc/wms?service=WMS&version=1.1.0&request=GetMap
         &layers=nurc:active&styles=geo2&bbox=0.0,0.0,24.0,44.0&width=279&height=512
         &srs=EPSG:4326&format=application/openlayers
         &viewparams=fq:security_ss:WEP
         
Will send down to SOLR a query looking like::

   omitHeader=true&fl=geo2,id&q=*:*&rows=2147483647&sort=id asc
   &fq=status_s:active AND geo2:"Intersects(POLYGON ((-1.7197265625 -2.87890625, 
       -1.7197265625 8.20703125, 4.3603515625 8.20703125, 4.3603515625 -2.87890625, 
       -1.7197265625 -2.87890625)))"
   &fq=security_ss:WEP&cursorMark=AoEhOA==
   
You can notice that:

* Only the columns needed for the display (in this case, a single geometry) are retrieved
* The bbox and layer identification filters are specified in the first ``fq``
* The custom ``fq`` is passed as a second ``fq`` parameter (SOLR will treat it as being and-ed with
  the previuos one)

Commit message:

Updated docs to reflect new solr mapping strategy. See GEOT-5000.

doc/en/user/source/community/solr/index.rst, after:

.. _community_solr:

SOLR data store
===============

`SORL <http://lucene.apache.org/solr/>`_ is a popular search platform based on Apache Lucene project. 
Its major features include powerful full-text search, hit highlighting, faceted search, near real-time indexing, 
dynamic clustering, database integration, rich document (e.g., Word, PDF) handling, and most
importantly for the GeoServer integration, geospatial search.

The latest versions of SOLR can host most basic types of geometries (points, lines and polygons)
as WKT and index them with a spatial index.

.. note:: GeoServer does not come built-in with support for SOLR; it must be installed through this community module. 

SOLR version
------------

The GeoServer SOLR extension has been tested with SORL version 4.8, 4.9, and 4.10.

 .. _solr_install:

Mapping documents to layers
---------------------------

SOLR indexes almost free form documents, the SOLR instance has a collection of fields, and 
each document can contain any field, in any combination.
On the other side, GeoServer organizes data in fixed structure feature types, and exposes 
data in separate layers. This leaves the question of how documents in the index
should be organized into layers.

Referred to as "layer mapping", at this time there are two options.

Using a field to group documents
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first option is to use a field to classify documents in the index. The unique
set of values of the field in the index becomes the list of layers. This field is
chosen by the administrator when configuring the data store.

This mapping strategy is referred to as "FIELD" in the configuration UI. 


Mapping the index as a single layer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The second option is to map the entire SOLR index as a single layer. This mapping
mode requires no further configuration. It is refereed to as "SINGLE" in the 
configuration UI. 

Installing the SOLR extension
-----------------------------------

#. Download the SOLR extension from the `nightly GeoServer community module builds <http://ares.boundlessgeo.com/geoserver/master/community-latest/>`_.

   .. warning:: Make sure to match the version of the extension to the version of the GeoServer instance.

#. If GeoServer is running, stop it.

#. Extract the contents of the archive into the ``WEB-INF/lib`` directory of the GeoServer installation.

#. Restart GeoServer, the SORL data store should show up as an option when going through the new store
   creation workflow.

Connecting to a SOLR server
----------------------------

Once the extension is properly installed ``SOLR`` will show up as an option when creating a new data store.

.. figure:: images/solr_store.png
   :align: center

   *SOLR in the list of vector data sources*

.. _config_solr:

Configuring a SOLR data store
-----------------------------

.. figure:: images/solr_configuration.png
   :align: center

   *Configuring a SOLR data store*

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80

   * - ``solr_url``
     - Provide a link to the SORL server that provides the documents
   * - ``layer_mapper``
     - Layer mapping strategy to use as described above. Must be one of "FIELD" or "SINGLE".
   * - ``layer_name_field``
     - Name of the field to use with the "FIELD" mapping strategy. The unique values of this
       field become the layers published by the data store.
     
Once the parameters are entered and confirmed, GeoServer will contact the SORL server and 
fetch a list of layer names and fill the layer chooser page accordingly:

.. figure:: images/solr_layerlist.png
   :align: center
   
   *List of layers available in the SOLR server*

Configuring a new SOLR base layer
---------------------------------

Once the layer name is chosen, the usual layer configuration panel will appear, with a pop-up showing
in a table the fields available:

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist.png
   :align: center
   
   *The layer field list configuration*
   
.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 80

   * - ``Is empty``
     - Read only fields, checked if the field has no values in the documents associated to this layer
   * - ``Use``
     - Used to select the fields that will make up this layer features
   * - ``Name``
     - Name of the field
   * - ``Type``
     - Type of the field, as derived from the SORL schema. For geometry types, you have the option to provide a more specific data type
   * - ``SRID``
     - Native spatial reference ID of the geometries
   * - ``Default geometry``
     - Indicates if the geometry field is the default one. Useful if the documents contain more than one geometry field, 
       as SLDs and spatial filters will hit the default geometry field unless otherwise specified
   * - ``Identifier``
     - Check if the field can be used as the feature identifier 


By default the list will contain only the fields that have at least one non null value in the documents
associated to the layer, but it is possible to get the full list by un-checking the "Hide field if empty"
check-box:

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist_all.png
   :align: center
   
   *Showing all fields available in SOLR*

Once the table is filled with the all the required parameters, press the "Apply" button to confirm
and go back to the main layer configuration panel.
Should the choice of fields be modified, you can click the "Configure SOLR fields" just below the "Feature Type Details" panel.

.. figure:: images/solr_fieldlist_edit.png
   :align: center
   
   *Going back to the field list editor*
   
The rest of the layer configuration works as normal, once all the fields are provided you'll be able to
save and use the layer in WMS and WFS.

.. warning:: In order to compute the bounding box GeoServer will have to fetch all the geometries making up the layer out of SOLR, 
          this operation might take some time, you're advised to manually entered the native bounding box when configuring a 
          layer out of a large document set
          
Custom ``q`` and ``fq`` parameters
----------------------------------

The SORL store will translate most OGC filters, as specified in SLD, CQL Filter or OGC filter,
down into the SOLR engine for native filtering, using the ``fq`` parameter.
However, in some occasions you might need to specify manually either ``q`` or ``fq``, to leverage
some native SORL filtering ability that cannot be expressed via OGC filters.

This can be done by specifying those as ``viewparams``, pretty much like in parametric sql views
atop relational databases.

For example, the following URL::

    http://localhost:8080/geoserver/nurc/wms?service=WMS&version=1.1.0&request=GetMap
         &layers=nurc:active&styles=geo2&bbox=0.0,0.0,24.0,44.0&width=279&height=512
         &srs=EPSG:4326&format=application/openlayers
         &viewparams=fq:security_ss:WEP
         
Will send down to SOLR a query looking like::

   omitHeader=true&fl=geo2,id&q=*:*&rows=2147483647&sort=id asc
   &fq=status_s:active AND geo2:"Intersects(POLYGON ((-1.7197265625 -2.87890625, 
       -1.7197265625 8.20703125, 4.3603515625 8.20703125, 4.3603515625 -2.87890625, 
       -1.7197265625 -2.87890625)))"
   &fq=security_ss:WEP&cursorMark=AoEhOA==
   
You can notice that:

* Only the columns needed for the display (in this case, a single geometry) are retrieved
* The bbox and layer identification filters are specified in the first ``fq``
* The custom ``fq`` is passed as a second ``fq`` parameter (SOLR will treat it as being and-ed with
  the previuos one)
