doc/en/user/source/webadmin/data/layergroups.rst, before:

.. _webadmin_layergroups:

Layer Groups
============

A layer group is a container in which layers and other groups can be organized in a hierarchical structure. A layer group can be referred to by one name, this allows for simpler WMS requests, as the request need only refer to one layer as opposed to multiple individual layers.

Layer group behaviour can be configured by setting its :guilabel:`mode`. There are 4 available values:

* **single**: the layer group is exposed as a single layer with a name.
* **named tree**: the layer group can be referred to by one name, but also exposes its nested layers and groups in the capabilities document.
* **container tree**: the layer group is exposed in the capabilities document, but does not have a name, making it impossible to render it on its own. This is called "containing category" in the WMS specification.
* **Earth Observation tree**: a special type of group created to manage the WMS Earth Observation requirements. This group does not render its nested layers and groups, but only a "preview layer" called Root Layer. When this mode is chosen, a new field "Root Layer" will be exposed in the configuration UI.

In case a layer is included in a any non *single* group it won't be listed anymore in the flat layer list, although it will still be possible to include the same layer in different layer groups. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups.png
   :align: center

   *Layer Groups page*

Edit Layer Group
----------------

To bring up the layer group edit page, click a layer group name. The initial fields allow you configure the name, title, abstract, workspace, bounds, projection and mode of the layer group. To automatically set bounding box, select the :guilabel:`Generate Bounds` button. You may also provide your own custom bounding box parameters. To select an appropriate projection click the :guilabel:`Find` button.

.. note:: A layer group can consist of layers with dissimilar bounds and projections. GeoServer will automatically reproject all layers to the projection of the layer group.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit.png

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit_table.png
   :align: center

   *Layer Groups Edit page*

The table at the bottom of the page lists layers and groups contained within the current layer group. We refer to layers and layer groups as :guilabel:`publishable elements`. When a layer group is processed, the layers are rendered in the order provided, so the :guilabel:`publishable elements` at the bottom of list will be rendered last and will show on top of the other :guilabel:`publishable elements`.

A :guilabel:`publishable element` can be positioned higher or lower on this list by clicking the green up or down arrows, respectively. The layer at the top of the list is the first one to be painted, the layer below it will be painted second, and so on, the last layer will be painted on top of all others (this is the so called "painter's model").

The :guilabel:`Style` column shows the style associated with each layer. To change the style associated with a layer, click the appropriate style link. A list of enabled styles will be displayed. Clicking on a style name reassigns the layer's style.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit_styles.png
   :align: center
   
   *Style editing for a layer within a layer group*

To remove a :guilabel:`publishable element` from the layer group, select its button in the :guilabel:`Remove` column. You will now be prompted to confirm or cancel this deletion.

A layer can be added to the list by clicking the :guilabel:`Add Layer...` button at the top of the table. From the list of layers, select the layer to be added by clicking the layer name. The selected layer will be appended to the bottom of the :guilabel:`publishable` list. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_layer.png
   :align: center

   *Dialog for adding a layer to a layer group*

A layer group can be added by clicking the :guilabel:`Add Layer Group...` button at the top of the table. From the list of layer groups, select the layer group to be added by clicking its name. The selected group will be appended to the bottom of the :guilabel:`publishable` list. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_layergroup.png
   :align: center

   *Dialog for adding a layer group to a layer group*

You can view layer groups in the :ref:`layerpreview` section of the web admin.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_tasmania.png
   :align: center 

   *Openlayers preview of the layer group "tasmania"*

Add a Layer Group
-----------------

The buttons for adding and removing a layer group can be found at the top of the :guilabel:`Layer Groups` page. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add.png
   :align: center

   *Buttons to add or remove a layer group*
   
To add a new layer group, select the "Add a new layer group" button. You will be prompted to name the layer group.
   
.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_name.png
   :align: center

   *New layer group dialog*

When finished, click :guilabel:`Submit`. You will be redirected to an empty layer group configuration page. Begin by adding layers by clicking the :guilabel:`Add layer...` button (described in the previous section). Once the layers are positioned accordingly, press :guilabel:`Generate Bounds` to automatically generate the bounding box and projection. Press :guilabel:`Save` to save the new layer group.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_edit.png
   :align: center

   *New layer group configuration page*

Remove a layer group
--------------------

To remove a layer group, click the check box next to the layer group. Multiple layer groups can be selected for batch removal. Click the :guilabel:`remove selected layer group(s)` link. You will be asked to confirm or cancel the deletion. Selecting :guilabel:`OK` successfully removes the layer group. 
 
.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_delete.png
   :align: center
   
   *Removing a layer group*

Commit message:

layer group corrections from martin.
commit e2af6e6e77e1d19a52c1f26e73e288e0381433f8
Merge: 137ce0a 85d3f97
Author: Jody Garnett <jody.garnett@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 16:16:26 2015 -0700

    Merge branch 'patch-2' of https://github.com/dr-jts/geoserver into dr-jts-patch-2

commit 85d3f975ef9f5d78ad390bf495cc5bcc658b7522
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:51:52 2015 -0700

    Wording fix

commit ce39eec8b8c3dae96ae271362827a1322ddd17f7
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:50:33 2015 -0700

    Wording improvements

commit a150132f3a3a567976e426e093714514414000b4
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:41:03 2015 -0700

    Added Mode heading, formatting fixes

commit 763c03182a8414128372b5f4211fd6ae4dfab977
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:34:35 2015 -0700

    Make wording consistent

commit d4188ae8980b5ad02a1fc688713f4c7c97381139
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:33:22 2015 -0700

    Minor wording improvement

commit 7d89f5e5509d9753587c77e5ca4be0b47a48dc7f
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Thu May 7 09:25:26 2015 -0700

    Fixed typo, wording improvements

    Fixed typo, wording improvements

commit da743b7b41be698e3d11ab012b31da4a192c2ffa
Author: Martin Davis <mtnclimb@gmail.com>
Date:   Mon May 4 11:05:31 2015 -0700

    Improvements for Layer Group page

    Some improvements to wording and information on Web Admin Layer Group page.

doc/en/user/source/webadmin/data/layergroups.rst, after:

.. _webadmin_layergroups:

Layer Groups
============

A layer group is a container in which layers and other layer groups can be organized in a hierarchical structure. A layer group can be referred to by a single name in WMS requests.  This allows simpler requests, as one layer can be specified instead of multiple individual layers.
A layer group also provides a consistent, fixed ordering of the layers it contains, and can specify alternate (non-default) styles for layers.

Layer Group Modes
-----------------

Layer group behaviour can be configured by setting its :guilabel:`mode`. There are 4 available values:

* **single**: the layer group is exposed as a single layer with a name.
* **named tree**: the layer group can be referred to by one name, but also exposes its nested layers and groups in the capabilities document.
* **container tree**: the layer group is exposed in the capabilities document, but does not have a name, making it impossible to render it on its own. This is called "containing category" in the WMS specification.
* **Earth Observation tree**: a special type of group created to manage the WMS Earth Observation requirements. This group does not render its nested layers and groups, but only a "preview layer" called Root Layer. When this mode is chosen, a new field "Root Layer" will be exposed in the configuration UI.

If a layer is included in any non *single* mode group, it will no longer be listed in the flat layer list.  It will still be possible to include the layer in other layer groups. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups.png
   :align: center

   *Layer Groups page*

Edit a Layer Group
----------------

To bring up the layer group edit page, click a layer group name. The initial fields allow you to configure the name, title, abstract, workspace, bounds, projection and mode of the layer group. To automatically set the bounding box, select the :guilabel:`Generate Bounds` button. You may also provide your own custom bounding box extents. To select an appropriate projection click the :guilabel:`Find` button.

.. note:: A layer group can contain layers with dissimilar bounds and projections. GeoServer automatically reprojects all layers to the projection of the layer group.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit.png

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit_table.png
   :align: center

   *Layer Groups Edit page*

The table at the bottom of the page lists layers and groups contained within the current layer group. We refer to layers and layer groups as :guilabel:`publishable elements`. When a layer group is processed, the layers are rendered in the order provided, so the :guilabel:`publishable elements` at the bottom of list will be rendered last and will show on top of the other :guilabel:`publishable elements`.

A :guilabel:`publishable element` can be positioned higher or lower on this list by clicking the green up or down arrows, respectively. The layer at the top of the list is the first one to be painted, the layer below it will be painted second, and so on, the last layer will be painted on top of all others (this is the so called "painter's model").

The :guilabel:`Style` column shows the style associated with each layer. To change the style associated with a layer, click the appropriate style link. A list of enabled styles will be displayed. Clicking on a style name reassigns the layer's style.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_edit_styles.png
   :align: center
   
   *Style editing for a layer within a layer group*

To remove a :guilabel:`publishable element` from the layer group, select its button in the :guilabel:`Remove` column. You will now be prompted to confirm or cancel this deletion.

A layer can be added to the list by clicking the :guilabel:`Add Layer...` button at the top of the table. From the list of layers, select the layer to be added by clicking the layer name. The selected layer will be appended to the bottom of the :guilabel:`publishable` list. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_layer.png
   :align: center

   *Dialog for adding a layer to a layer group*

A layer group can be added by clicking the :guilabel:`Add Layer Group...` button at the top of the table. From the list of layer groups, select the layer group to be added by clicking its name. The selected group will be appended to the bottom of the :guilabel:`publishable` list. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_layergroup.png
   :align: center

   *Dialog for adding a layer group to a layer group*

You can view layer groups in the :ref:`layerpreview` section of the web admin.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_tasmania.png
   :align: center 

   *Openlayers preview of the layer group "tasmania"*

Add a Layer Group
-----------------

The buttons for adding and removing a layer group can be found at the top of the :guilabel:`Layer Groups` page. 

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add.png
   :align: center

   *Buttons to add or remove a layer group*
   
To add a new layer group, select the "Add a new layer group" button. You will be prompted to name the layer group.
   
.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_name.png
   :align: center

   *New layer group dialog*

When finished, click :guilabel:`Submit`. You will be redirected to an empty layer group configuration page. Begin by adding layers by clicking the :guilabel:`Add layer...` button (described in the previous section). Once the layers are positioned accordingly, press :guilabel:`Generate Bounds` to automatically generate the bounding box and projection. Press :guilabel:`Save` to save the new layer group.

.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_add_edit.png
   :align: center

   *New layer group configuration page*

Remove a Layer Group
--------------------

To remove a layer group, click the check box next to the layer group. Multiple layer groups can be selected for batch removal. Click the :guilabel:`remove selected layer group(s)` link. You will be asked to confirm or cancel the deletion. Selecting :guilabel:`OK` successfully removes the layer group. 
 
.. figure:: ../images/data_layergroups_delete.png
   :align: center
   
   *Removing a layer group*
