doc/en/developer/source/eclipse-guide/index.rst, before:

.. _eclipse_guide:

Eclipse Guide
=============

A reference for developing GeoServer with Eclipse.

.. contents:: :local:

Importing modules
-----------------

See the Eclipse section of the :ref:`maven_guide`.

Running and debugging
---------------------

Run or debug the class ``org.geoserver.web.Start`` in the ``web-app`` 
module. The steps to do so are detailed in the :ref:`quickstart`.

Setting the data directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If unset, GeoServer will default to the ``minimal`` directory inside of the 
``web-app`` module for its data directory. To change this:

 #. Open ``Debug Configurations...`` from the Eclipse menu

    .. image:: dd1.jpg

 #. Select the ``Start`` configuration, select the ``Arguments`` panel and 
    specify the ``-DGEOSERVER_DATA_DIR`` parameter, setting it to the absolute
    path of the data directory

    .. image:: dd2.jpg

Changing the default port for Jetty
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If unset, Jetty will default to port ``8080``. To change this:

  #. Open the ``Arguments`` panel of the ``Start`` configuration as described
     in the above section

  #. Specify the ``-Djetty.port`` parameter, setting it to the desired port

     .. image:: port.jpg

Configuring JNDI resources in Jetty
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JNDI resources such as data sources can be configured by supplying a Jetty
server configuration file named in the system property ``jetty.config.file``,
specified as a line in ``VM arguments`` in the ``Arguments`` panel of the launch
configuration for ``Start`` (separate lines are joined when the JVM is launched).
The path to the configuration file is relative to the root of the ``web-app`` module,
in which the launch configuration runs. Naming factory system properties must also be
configured for Jetty. For example, ``VM arguments`` could include::

    -Djetty.config.file=../../../../../settings/jetty.xml
    -Djava.naming.factory.url.pkgs=org.mortbay.naming
    -Djava.naming.factory.initial=org.mortbay.naming.InitialContextFactory

The following Jetty server configuration file
configures a JNDI data source ``java:comp/env/jdbc/demo`` that is a
connection pool for an Oracle database::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <!DOCTYPE Configure PUBLIC "-//Mort Bay Consulting//DTD Configure//EN" "http://jetty.mortbay.org/configure.dtd">
    <Configure class="org.mortbay.jetty.Server">
        <New class="org.mortbay.jetty.plus.naming.Resource">
            <Arg>java:comp/env/jdbc/demo</Arg>
            <Arg>
                <New class="org.apache.commons.dbcp.BasicDataSource">
                    <Set name="driverClassName">oracle.jdbc.driver.OracleDriver</Set>
                    <Set name="url">jdbc:oracle:thin:@oracle.example.com:1521:demodb</Set>
                    <Set name="username">claudius</Set>
                    <Set name="password">s3cr3t</Set>
                    <Set name="maxActive">20</Set>
                    <Set name="maxIdle">10</Set>
                    <Set name="minIdle">0</Set>
                    <Set name="maxWait">10000</Set>
                    <Set name="minEvictableIdleTimeMillis">300000</Set>
                    <Set name="timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis">300000</Set>
                    <Set name="numTestsPerEvictionRun">20</Set>
                    <Set name="poolPreparedStatements">true</Set>
                    <Set name="maxOpenPreparedStatements">100</Set>
                    <Set name="testOnBorrow">true</Set>
                    <Set name="validationQuery">SELECT SYSDATE FROM DUAL</Set>
                </New>
            </Arg>
        </New>
    </Configure>

Jetty does not mandate a ``reference-ref`` in GeoServer ``WEB-INF/web.xml``,
so there is no need to modify that file. No Jetty-specific information is
required inside the GeoServer ``web-app`` module or data directory, so JNDI 
resources can be tested under Jetty for later deployment under Tomcat.
See also the tutorial `Setting up a JNDI connection pool with Tomcat
<http://docs.geoserver.org/stable/en/user/tutorials/tomcat-jndi/tomcat-jndi.html>`_
in the GeoServer User Manual.

Starting Jetty with an open SSL port
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The SSL port used ``8843``. 

  #. Open the ``Arguments`` panel of the ``Start`` configuration. 
  #. Specify the ``-Dssl.hostname`` parameter, setting it to the full qualified host name of the box 
     running Jetty.  

     .. image:: ssl.jpeg
     
On first time startup, a key store is created in ``<home directory>/.geoserver/keystore.jks``. 
The password is **changeit** and the key store contains a self signed certificate for the host name
passed in the ``ssl.hostname`` parameter.

Test the SSL connection by opening a browser and entering  
**https://ux-desktop03.mc-home.local:8843/geoserver**. The browser should complain about the self 
singed certificate which does not hurt for test and development setups. 


Eclipse preferences
-------------------

Code formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download http://svn.osgeo.org/geotools/trunk/build/eclipse/formatter.xml
#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Code Style``, ``Formatter`` and click ``Import...``

   .. image:: code_formatting1.jpg

#. Select the ``formatter.xml`` file downloaded in step 1
#. Click ``Apply``

   .. image:: code_formatting2.jpg

Code templates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download http://svn.osgeo.org/geotools/trunk/build/eclipse/codetemplates.xml
#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Code Style``, ``Code Templates`` and click ``Import...``

   .. image:: code_templates.jpg

#. Select the ``codetemplates.xml`` file downloaded in step 1
#. Click ``Apply``

Text editors
^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Navigate to ``General``, ``Editors``, ``Text Editors``
#. Check ``Insert spaces for tabs``
#. Check ``Show print margin`` and set ``Print margin column`` to "100"
#. Check ``Show line numbers``
#. Check ``Show whitespace characters`` (optional)

   .. note::

      Showing whitespace characters can help insure that unecessary whitespace 
      is not unintentionaly comitted.
   
   .. image:: text_editors.jpg

#. Click ``Apply``

Compiler
^^^^^^^^

#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Compiler``, ``Building``
#. Expand ``Output folder`` and add ".svn/" to the list of 
   ``Filtered resources``

   .. image:: compiler.jpg

#. Click ``Apply``

Commit message:

[GEOS-7221] Document how to debug extensions from eclipse

doc/en/developer/source/eclipse-guide/index.rst, after:

.. _eclipse_guide:

Eclipse Guide
=============

A reference for developing GeoServer with Eclipse.

.. contents:: :local:

Importing modules
-----------------

See the Eclipse section of the :ref:`maven_guide`.

Running and debugging
---------------------

Run or debug the class ``org.geoserver.web.Start`` in the ``web-app`` 
module. The steps to do so are detailed in the :ref:`quickstart`.

Running GeoServer with Extensions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

By default, GeoServer will run without any extensions enabled. In order to run GeoServer with extensions, the ``web-app`` module declares a number of profiles used to enable specific extensions when running ``Start``. To enable an extension, re-generate the root eclipse profile with the appropriate maven profile(s) enabled::

  % mvn eclipse:eclipse -P wps

The full list of supported profiles can be found in ``src/web/app/pom.xml``.

Setting the data directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If unset, GeoServer will default to the ``minimal`` directory inside of the 
``web-app`` module for its data directory. To change this:

 #. Open ``Debug Configurations...`` from the Eclipse menu

    .. image:: dd1.jpg

 #. Select the ``Start`` configuration, select the ``Arguments`` panel and 
    specify the ``-DGEOSERVER_DATA_DIR`` parameter, setting it to the absolute
    path of the data directory

    .. image:: dd2.jpg

Changing the default port for Jetty
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If unset, Jetty will default to port ``8080``. To change this:

  #. Open the ``Arguments`` panel of the ``Start`` configuration as described
     in the above section

  #. Specify the ``-Djetty.port`` parameter, setting it to the desired port

     .. image:: port.jpg

Configuring JNDI resources in Jetty
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

JNDI resources such as data sources can be configured by supplying a Jetty
server configuration file named in the system property ``jetty.config.file``,
specified as a line in ``VM arguments`` in the ``Arguments`` panel of the launch
configuration for ``Start`` (separate lines are joined when the JVM is launched).
The path to the configuration file is relative to the root of the ``web-app`` module,
in which the launch configuration runs. Naming factory system properties must also be
configured for Jetty. For example, ``VM arguments`` could include::

    -Djetty.config.file=../../../../../settings/jetty.xml
    -Djava.naming.factory.url.pkgs=org.mortbay.naming
    -Djava.naming.factory.initial=org.mortbay.naming.InitialContextFactory

The following Jetty server configuration file
configures a JNDI data source ``java:comp/env/jdbc/demo`` that is a
connection pool for an Oracle database::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <!DOCTYPE Configure PUBLIC "-//Mort Bay Consulting//DTD Configure//EN" "http://jetty.mortbay.org/configure.dtd">
    <Configure class="org.mortbay.jetty.Server">
        <New class="org.mortbay.jetty.plus.naming.Resource">
            <Arg>java:comp/env/jdbc/demo</Arg>
            <Arg>
                <New class="org.apache.commons.dbcp.BasicDataSource">
                    <Set name="driverClassName">oracle.jdbc.driver.OracleDriver</Set>
                    <Set name="url">jdbc:oracle:thin:@oracle.example.com:1521:demodb</Set>
                    <Set name="username">claudius</Set>
                    <Set name="password">s3cr3t</Set>
                    <Set name="maxActive">20</Set>
                    <Set name="maxIdle">10</Set>
                    <Set name="minIdle">0</Set>
                    <Set name="maxWait">10000</Set>
                    <Set name="minEvictableIdleTimeMillis">300000</Set>
                    <Set name="timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis">300000</Set>
                    <Set name="numTestsPerEvictionRun">20</Set>
                    <Set name="poolPreparedStatements">true</Set>
                    <Set name="maxOpenPreparedStatements">100</Set>
                    <Set name="testOnBorrow">true</Set>
                    <Set name="validationQuery">SELECT SYSDATE FROM DUAL</Set>
                </New>
            </Arg>
        </New>
    </Configure>

Jetty does not mandate a ``reference-ref`` in GeoServer ``WEB-INF/web.xml``,
so there is no need to modify that file. No Jetty-specific information is
required inside the GeoServer ``web-app`` module or data directory, so JNDI 
resources can be tested under Jetty for later deployment under Tomcat.
See also the tutorial `Setting up a JNDI connection pool with Tomcat
<http://docs.geoserver.org/stable/en/user/tutorials/tomcat-jndi/tomcat-jndi.html>`_
in the GeoServer User Manual.

Starting Jetty with an open SSL port
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The SSL port used ``8843``. 

  #. Open the ``Arguments`` panel of the ``Start`` configuration. 
  #. Specify the ``-Dssl.hostname`` parameter, setting it to the full qualified host name of the box 
     running Jetty.  

     .. image:: ssl.jpeg
     
On first time startup, a key store is created in ``<home directory>/.geoserver/keystore.jks``. 
The password is **changeit** and the key store contains a self signed certificate for the host name
passed in the ``ssl.hostname`` parameter.

Test the SSL connection by opening a browser and entering  
**https://ux-desktop03.mc-home.local:8843/geoserver**. The browser should complain about the self 
singed certificate which does not hurt for test and development setups. 


Eclipse preferences
-------------------

Code formatting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download http://svn.osgeo.org/geotools/trunk/build/eclipse/formatter.xml
#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Code Style``, ``Formatter`` and click ``Import...``

   .. image:: code_formatting1.jpg

#. Select the ``formatter.xml`` file downloaded in step 1
#. Click ``Apply``

   .. image:: code_formatting2.jpg

Code templates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Download http://svn.osgeo.org/geotools/trunk/build/eclipse/codetemplates.xml
#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Code Style``, ``Code Templates`` and click ``Import...``

   .. image:: code_templates.jpg

#. Select the ``codetemplates.xml`` file downloaded in step 1
#. Click ``Apply``

Text editors
^^^^^^^^^^^^

#. Navigate to ``General``, ``Editors``, ``Text Editors``
#. Check ``Insert spaces for tabs``
#. Check ``Show print margin`` and set ``Print margin column`` to "100"
#. Check ``Show line numbers``
#. Check ``Show whitespace characters`` (optional)

   .. note::

      Showing whitespace characters can help insure that unecessary whitespace 
      is not unintentionaly comitted.
   
   .. image:: text_editors.jpg

#. Click ``Apply``

Compiler
^^^^^^^^

#. Navigate to ``Java``, ``Compiler``, ``Building``
#. Expand ``Output folder`` and add ".svn/" to the list of 
   ``Filtered resources``

   .. image:: compiler.jpg

#. Click ``Apply``
